# --- peerpanel manuscript attribution ---
# Title: When is an auxotroph not an auxotroph: how budding yeast lacking MET17 collectively overcome their metabolic defect
# Authors: Sonal; Alex E. Yuan; Xueqin Yang; Wenying Shou
# Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.05.18.541364v1
# License: CC BY 4.0 — https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
# Changes: converted from JATS XML to plain text; figures, tables, display math and the reference list stripped; section headings kept as their own paragraphs
# Preprint-DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.18.541364
# Preprint-Version: 1
# Source-JATS-md5: 2ec6784d2380108f9fe8c4d3d885c52d
# Regenerate: uv run python -m peerpanel.manuscripts.ingest 10.1101/2023.05.18.541364 --version 1 --slug met17-auxotroph --published-doi 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002439 --pmcid PMC10729969
# --- end attribution ---

INTRODUCTION

Sulfur metabolism is vital to all organisms and produces a range of essential metabolites. Perhaps the best-known organosulfurs—sulfur-containing organic compounds—are the essential amino acids methionine and cysteine. The relevance of sulfur metabolites however extends far beyond protein synthesis. AdoMet, an activated form of methionine, serves as a universal methyl donor for nucleotides, proteins and small metabolites, and perturbations of AdoMet metabolism are implicated in liver pathologies [1]. Glutathione, generated from cysteine, is crucial for cellular redox homeostasis [2]; decreased glutathione levels leads to oxidative stress which has been implicated in ageing and neurodegeneration [3,4]. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S), an inorganic gas which can be produced during organosulfur metabolism, has therapeutic potential in gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, inflammatory, and nervous systems [5,6]. A deeper understanding of sulfur metabolism can thus have a wide societal impact.

Besides these critical roles in cell physiology, secreted sulfur metabolites can also influence population-level behavior in microbes. For example, in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, populations can expand the range of temperatures they can tolerate by leveraging the antioxidant properties of secreted glutathione [7]. As another example, H2S is thought to promote population synchrony during ultradian respiratory oscillations in aerobic continuous cultures by inhibiting the respiratory chain, and exogenous sulfide can shift the phase of these oscillations [8,9]. In fact, microorganisms release a constellation of volatile sulfur compounds [10], which have been of interest to the food industry (e.g. in optimizing wine aroma [11]), but the significance of many of these compounds to the microbes themselves is poorly understood.

Unlike humans, yeast can synthesize essential organosulfurs de novo by assimilating inorganic sulfates (SO42-) from their environment. Various genes of sulfur metabolism were discovered in the budding yeast through genetic screens for organosulfur auxotrophs—mutants which can only grow when an organosulfur is supplemented and are otherwise unable to grow on sulfate [12]. These studies, together with biochemical analyses, led to the current model of sulfur metabolism in yeast [12]. In a simplified version of this model (Fig 1A), sulfate is reduced to hydrogen sulfide (H2S) through a series of enzymatic reactions. Hydrogen sulfide is then reacted to O-acetyl homoserine (OAH; Fig 1A) to form homocysteine, an organosulfur which can be interconverted to other organosulfurs (Fig 1A, purple). Some organosulfurs (e.g. cysteine) can be broken down to release H2S and sulfite through dedicated pathways.

The MET17 gene, also known as MET15 or MET25 [13–15], catalyzes homocysteine synthesis by reacting H2S with O-acetyl homoserine (i.e. displaying OAH sulfhydrylase activity) [16–18]. Although purified Met17 protein could also catalyze cysteine synthesis by reacting H2S with O-acetyl serine (i.e. displaying OAS sulfhydrylase activity), this activity was low [18] and unlikely to be relevant in vivo in S. cerevisae [19]. Thus, Met17 has been assigned as the sole enzyme for synthesizing homocysteine—the precursor to all other forms of organosulfurs (Fig 1A). met17 mutants are auxotrophic for organosulfurs, and the met17 deletion mutation (met17Δ) [20] is commonly used in genetic studies of yeast, for example as a background mutation in the yeast deletion library [21,22].

Surprisingly, we found that met17Δ yeast can in fact grow on sulfate without any organosulfur supplements, albeit in a density-dependent manner. Here, we show that density-dependence is mediated via the volatile metabolite H2S, which can be assimilated into organosulfurs through the YLL058W (HSU1) gene in the absence of MET17. A mathematical model based on low activity of Hsu1 can explain the density-dependent growth of met17Δ on sulfate. In Discussions, we reconcile conflicts in earlier studies, highlight considerations for studying gas-mediated microbial interactions, and speculate on the functions of HSU1 in wildtype yeast.

RESULTS

met17Δ show density-dependent growth on sulfate

met17 mutants were first identified in genetic screens for organosulfur auxotrophs [23] and have long been thought to be unable to grow on inorganic sulfate [12]. On synthetic minimal medium (SD) containing sulfate as the sole sulfur source, the wildtype MET17 prototrophic strain grew a dense lawn as expected (Fig 1B). Surprisingly, in the patches of the met17 deletion (met17Δ) mutant, individual colonies would appear after 1-3 days of incubation (Fig 1B), even though such patches usually remain clear for true auxotrophs. Furthermore, met17Δ yeast could sometimes grow to high cell densities in liquid SD medium over repeated passaging (Fig 1C). This indicated that we were not merely observing residual growth fueled by organosulfurs that the cells had accumulated during exponential growth in methionine-supplemented medium. Similar observations have since been reported by other labs [24,25], and chromatographic analyses has confirmed that organosulfur contaminants occur in negligible quantities in the commercially available yeast nitrogenous base that was used to prepare SD medium [25].

The seemingly erratic growth behavior of met17Δ on sulfate could potentially be explained by growth being dependent on the initial cell density in liquid cultures (Fig 1D). At high initial cell densities, growth of met17Δ on sulfate was deterministic. At very low initial cell densities, the cultures did not grow. Strikingly, at intermediate cell densities, growth in the cultures was stochastic: three replicate cultures started from the same parent culture would deviate in the lag time before population growth took off (Fig 1D, green asterisks). Note that the met17Δ cells were growing exponentially in minimal medium supplemented with methionine before being washed and transferred to minimal medium without organosulfurs. Truly prototrophic cells would exhibit similar growth behaviors independent of the initial culture density upon such a transition. Thus, met17Δ were not actual prototrophs but could overcome their auxotrophy at sufficiently high cell densities.

While our initial observations (Figs 1C and 1D) were made in yeast of the background RM11, we also observed a similar phenomenon in the S288C background (S1 Fig). The phenotype was however weaker: S288C met17Δ grew to high turbidity in minimal media but growth did not persist after dilution and required considerably higher initial cell densities in S288C as compared to RM11 (S1 Fig).

Density-dependent growth of met17Δ on sulfate is mediated by hydrogen sulfide

Density-dependent growth in microbial populations is often mediated by the release of a chemical which, upon reaching a critical concentration, enables cells to grow and divide. Because met17Δ are perturbed at the enzymatic assimilation of the volatile compound hydrogen sulfide (H2S), we asked whether the growth mediator of met17Δ might be volatile. To test this, we limited gas exchange by using parafilm to seal the loose-fitting plastic lids on the culture tubes, and asked if the growth outcomes of met17Δ populations at different cell densities were impacted. Indeed, populations in parafilm-sealed tubes grew faster than in those without sealing (compare Fig 2B with Fig 2A; see S2 Fig for S288C). Even cultures at low cell densities eventually grew to saturation, although lag time exhibited stochasticity. When cultured in a 96-well plate sharing headspace, all cell densities could grow to saturation within a short duration (Fig 2C), suggesting that volatiles released from high-density cultures could facilitate the growth of low-density cultures. Interestingly, little stochasticity was observed in the lag time when lower cell densities grew in a shared headspace, suggesting that small differences amidst the gaseous environments within culture tubes gave rise to the stochastic growth dynamics (compare light gray trendlines in Fig 2C and Fig 2B). In contrast, only residual growth was observed when different initial cell densities of another methionine auxotroph, met14Δ, were grown on sulfate in a 96-well plate (Fig 2D, all cultures mildly increasing their turbidity by a fixed fold without reaching saturation).

Corroborating previous reports of H2S release from met17Δ cells [15,26], we noted that met17Δ cultures growing on sulfate emanated a strong rotten-egg odor, and a piece of lead acetate paper placed in the headspace of met17Δ cultures turned black (S3 Fig). To test whether yeast can uptake and consume ambient H2S gas, we grew met14Δ yeast and met17Δ yeast in different wells of the same 96-well plate. Since MET14 functions upstream of H2S formation during sulfate assimilation (Fig 1A), we hypothesized that met14Δ yeast should grow in the presence of H2S released by met17Δ. Indeed, in contrast to met14Δ showing only residual growth on sulfate by themselves (Fig 2D), all densities of met14Δ could grow when they shared headspace with met17Δ growing on sulfate in a 96-well plate (Fig 2E, right panel). Interestingly, growth of low-density met17Δ populations slowed down in the presence of met14Δ (compare Fig 2E left panel with Fig 2C), suggesting that the growth dynamics of met17Δ cultures were governed by the available quantity of the volatile sulfur forms which met14Δ and met17Δ competed for.

Finally, the growth of low-density met17Δ cultures was promoted by sodium salts of sulfide over a range of concentrations (Fig 2F and S4 Fig). Note that upon acidification, sulfide ions from the salts get protonated to release H2S gas. At a low sulfide concentration (1 μM), we see stochastic growth dynamics amidst three technical replicates (Fig 2F upper right panel). In contrast, the three replicates grew deterministically at intermediate concentrations of 50 μM and 100 μM (Fig 2F middle row). Thus, the transition from stochastic to deterministic growth dynamics observed with increasing initial cell densities in met17Δ cultures (Fig 1D) likely resulted from higher sulfide concentrations in high cell-density cultures. Interestingly, we noted that the cultures could not grow at the highest concentration of sodium hydroxide (NaHS) tested (1.5 mM in Fig 2F), indicating that high concentrations of sulfide are toxic to yeast cells, consistent with earlier studies [15,27]. This deterrence to the growth of eukaryotic cells might result from the well-characterized inhibition of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase by H2S [28].

Compared to RM11 met17Δ, S288C met17Δ required more H2S to grow and released less H2S. It took considerably higher concentrations of sodium sulfide to elicit growth in low-density cultures of S288C met17Δ on sulfate (S4 Fig, compare B with A). Moreover, S288C met17Δ could grow faster in the vicinity of RM11 met17Δ than when growing by themselves in a multi-well plate (S5 Fig, compare right panel of C with B), suggesting that RM11 met17Δ released more H2S than S288C met17Δ. Overall, both lower H2S release and higher H2S requirement may contribute to the sluggish growth of S288C met17Δ on sulfate compared to RM11 met17Δ (compare Fig1 with S1 Fig).

HSU1 is required for sulfide assimilation in met17Δ

The anomalous growth of met17Δ on sulfate indicates the existence of a MET17-independent pathway of sulfate assimilation in S. cerevisiae. Indeed, met17Δ could not grow at any cell density on sulfate-free medium (S6 Fig). During sulfate assimilation, Met17 catalyzes the reaction of sulfide with O-acetyl homoserine (OAH) to yield homocysteine (Fig 3A). In vitro, Met17 can also react sulfide with O-acetyl serine (OAS) to yield cysteine [29]. Other yeast species such as K. lactis, Y. lipolytica and S. pombe have dedicated enzymes to catalyze these two reactions [30]. Hypothetically, the MET17-independent pathway of sulfide fixation could meet the cell’s organosulfur requirements by catalyzing either of these reactions (GENE X in Fig 3A). However, alternate enzymes with similar functions have thus far not been characterized in S. cerevisiae. To discern if the alternative pathway requires OAH, we examined if met2Δ mutants, which lack OAH synthesis [31,32], could also bypass organosulfur auxotrophy. In a 96-well plate, where populations of met2Δ at different cell densities shared headspace, we found that the populations only showed residual growth (S7 Fig). Thus, it is likely that, similar to MET17, the alternative mechanism also utilizes OAH and sulfide.

Met17 is a pyridoxal phosphate–dependent enzyme. We proposed that any protein that performs a catalytic function similar to Met17 will bear structural similarity to the Met17 enzyme. Five candidate genes were identified by a protein BLAST using Met17’s sequence: CYS3, STR3, ICR7, YLL058W, YHR112C. If any of these genes was GENE X, then the met17Δ geneXΔ double mutant would no longer grow on sulfate even at a high initial cell density (Fig 3B). However, geneXΔ single mutant should grow on sulfate due to the activity of MET17 (Fig 3B). Out of the candidates, cys3Δ did not meet this criterion of our screen since it is a known cysteine auxotroph [33]. As a quick method of screening the remaining four candidates, we leveraged the fact that met17Δ is a background mutation in the yeast deletion library derived from the strain BY4741 of the S288C background [21]. For each candidate, different initial cell densities of the same mutant were inoculated into different wells of the same 96-well plate. This set-up allows us to clearly distinguish between residual growth (e.g., met14Δ, Fig 2D) and growth to saturation (e.g. met17Δ, Fig 2C). Out of the candidates tested, only deletion of YLL058W abrogated growth of met17Δ on sulfates (S8 Fig).

To confirm that the yll058wΔ single mutant is not auxotrophic, we deleted the gene in the S288C strain background. Indeed, while met17Δ grew in a density-dependent fashion (Fig 3C left panel), yll058wΔ yeast could readily grow on sulfate without supplementation of organosulfurs (Fig 3C middle panel). In contrast, double mutants of met17Δyll058wΔ could no longer grow to saturation on sulfate at any density (Fig 3C right panel, showing only residual growth). The double mutants did not show papillae even when patched onto the same solid SD medium plate as H2S-releasing met17Δ (Fig 3D; S9A Fig for RM11), and could not grow even when cultured in the same 96-well plate as met17Δ (S9B Fig), indicating that the inability of met17Δyll058wΔ to grow on sulfate did not result from impairments in sulfide release but from defects in sulfide assimilation. While we were investigating this phenomenon, two other groups simultaneously reported this sulfide-assimilation function of YLL058W [24,25], and Yu et.al. named the locus Hydrogen Sulfide Utilizing-1 (HSU1) [25]. We will henceforth use the name HSU1 to refer to YLL058W. These other groups additionally demonstrated that Hsu1 protein can catalyze the same biochemical reaction as MET17, albeit at considerably lower efficiency [24,25].

HSU1 may have diverse roles in sulfur metabolism

Based on the fact that HSU1 can assimilate sulfide when sulfide concentrations are high, we hypothesized two possible functions for HSU1: 1) an alternate pathway to maximize sulfur assimilation when cells experience sulfur starvation; and/or 2) a mechanism to neutralize excess sulfide when ambient sulfide concentrations get dangerously high (e.g. Fig 2F last panel). Correspondingly, gene expression might be triggered either by sulfur starvation or by exposure to high sulfide concentrations. To test these hypotheses, we introduced a GFP coding sequence before the stop codon on the C-terminus of HSU1 in the S288C and the RM11 background. We then imaged these cells after treatment with sulfate-free medium (sulfur starvation; Figs 4A and 4C) or after exposure to different concentrations of sodium sulfide (Figs 4B and 4D). In both backgrounds, exponentially growing wildtype cells showed little GFP signal (Figs 4A and 4C, left panels). Interestingly, a sharp increase in GFP fluorescence was observed under sulfur starvation (Figs 4A and 4C, right panels). Non-specific starvation may not induce Hsu1, as cells grown to stationary phase in the SD minimal medium have little Hsu1 protein (Figs 4B and 4D, left panels). When minimal medium is supplemented with an intermediate level of sulfide (0.6 mM), Hsu1 protein is induced—more so in the RM11 than in the S288C background (Fig 4B and 4D, middle panels). At a high sulfide concentration (1.8 mM which can inhibit the growth of wildtype cells (S12A Fig), Hsu1 protein is induced in both backgrounds. Hsu1 protein generally shows a diffused localization in the cytoplasm, although punctate localization was occasionally also observed under sulfide exposure (Fig 4B and 4D, middle and right panels).

To identify the functional significance of HSU1, we compared wildtype and hsu1Δ S288C yeast under various conditions, including during sulfur starvation or sulfide exposure. Consistent with the lack of HSU1 expression in exponential phase, the growth rate of hsu1Δ did not differ from wildtype during exponential growth on minimal medium (S10 Fig). In competition assays under sulfur starvation, variation in the outcome was high, and no trend was detected in the fitness difference between wildtype and hsu1Δ (S11 Fig). High sulfide concentrations did impair growth, as was previously reported for met17Δ (Fig 2F), but the responses of wildtype and hsu1Δ to high sulfide were very similar (S12 Fig). Thus, HSU1 does not provide any discernable advantage to wildtype yeast under either sulfur starvation or sulfide exposure.

Recently, quantitative trait locus mapping of wine strains revealed that polymorphisms in HSU1 affect the production of volatile dimethyl sulfide from the exogenous organosulfur S-methylmethionine (SMM) [34]. Yeast usually obtain SMM from plant sources (e.g. from grape juice), and can grow on SMM as the sole sulfur source [35]. Interestingly, HSU1 resides on the same chromosomal segment as the SMM permease MMP1 and the SMM-metabolizing enzyme MHT1 [36], and all three enzymes are transcriptionally upregulated by Met4 [37], which in turn is required for growth on SMM [36]. To test if HSU1 contributes to SMM metabolism, we compared the growth rate of wildtype and hsu1Δ yeast in medium containing SMM as the sole sulfur source. However, both genotypes had indistinguishable growth rates (S13 Fig). Thus, while Hsu1 expression suggests multiple roles of the protein in sulfur metabolism, the precise function of HSU1 in wildtype yeast remains unclear.

A mathematical model assuming low efficiency of sulfide assimilation can explain density-dependent growth of met17Δ

What mechanisms might give rise to the density-dependent growth of met17Δ on sulfate? One possibility is stochastic cell-state switching, which has been widely observed in diverse microbes [38]. Specifically, in the case of met17Δ (Fig 5A), all cells may start out being “inactive”– incapable of assimilating sulfide for growth. However, the accumulation of sufficient sulfide may trigger a switch to an “active” or growth-competent state where cells can fix sulfide and give birth to new cells, which in turn release more sulfide. A sulfide-dependent regulation of HSU1’s expression may serve as the mechanism for such a switch. If this were the case, we would expect Hsu1 protein to be absent or weakly expressed in cells of low-density met17Δ cultures that fail to grow. However, considerable Hsu1-GFP expression was observed in low-density cultures within 4 hours of transfer to minimal medium, even if the cultures did not eventually grow (Fig 5B). HSU1 expression in met17Δ probably occurs because organosulfur starvation in met17Δ leads to a similar molecular response as sulfur starvation in wildtype cells [39], and we have shown that Hsu1 is induced in the latter condition (Fig 4A,C). Thus, if a cell-state switch for sulfide assimilation exists, it is not modulated at the level of Hsu1 protein expression.

A cell-state switch could however operate by other molecular mechanisms. For instance, a post-translational modification might activate Hsu1 once the ambient sulfide concentration has become sufficiently high. Independent of molecular mechanisms, we tested the existence of a cell-state switch by taking cells from a met17Δ culture that had started to grow on sulfate and using them to re-initiate cultures at different initial cell densities in minimal medium (containing sulfate). We hypothesized that since Hsu1 has already been activated, the fresh inoculations would be able to grow at lower initial densities. However, this was not observed (Fig 5C), indicating that there is no switch to a growth-competent state in met17Δ cells or that the switch does not persist dilution. Thus, a H2S-dependent growth switch is unlikely to be the sole mechanism producing density-dependent growth of met17Δ on sulfate. Similar results were observed for met17Δ of S288C background (S14A Fig).

Alternatively, density-dependence could simply result from inefficient assimilation of sulfide by Hsu1. To test this hypothesis, we developed a mathematical model describing how met17Δ grow by releasing and consuming sulfide. Note that we were able to use a deterministic model instead of a stochastic one because our data suggested that the observed stochastic growth dynamics resulted from experimental factors, rather than biological ones: Low-density met17Δ populations only show stochastic lag times in individual tubes (Fig 2B), and not when they share headspace in a multi-well plate (Fig 2C). This suggests that the variance in lag times results from small differences in the gas environments that the cells experience in each tube, which in turn could result from minor defects in sealing.

The model, comprising two differential equations describing the dynamics of population density x and sulfide concentration s, assumes that (i) all cells are capable of growth, with a carrying capacity K, (ii) growth rate has a Monod-dependence on sulfide concentration (Fig 5D), with maximal growth rate gmax and Monod constant (sulfide concentration at which half-maximal growth rate is achieved) ks; and (iii) sulfide is produced by cells (via sulfate reduction) at a constant rate r, consumed by cells at c amount per birth, and lost at a rate of δ. The equations are as follows:

Some parameters were directly measured in experiments: c = 3 fmole/cell (S15 Fig), K = 1.6 × 108 cells/ml; gmax = 0.26 /h (Methods: “Mathematical model”). Others were inferred by fitting the model to the experimental data: r = 0.41 fmole/cell/h and ks = 7.1 μM (Supplementary Text 1, section 3). This ks includes a factor that accounts for liquid-gas portioning of sulfide (Supplementary Text 1, section 4).

When population density is much smaller than the carrying capacity, growth rate will have a Monod-dependence on sulfide concentration. While this relationship is similar in form to the Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetics equation, the two equations are not equivalent. Michaelis constant and Monod constant respectively describe the substrate concentration at which half-maximal enzyme activity and half-maximal cell growth is attained. Cell growth is not only a function of enzyme affinity for substrate, but also of additional factors such as the number of enzymes in the cell and the coordination between the reaction and the rest of cellular metabolism. Indeed, Van Oss et al. report that the Michaelis constants of both Hsu1 and Met17 for sulfide are in millimolar range [24], but that concentration would be toxic to yeast (Fig 2F and S12A Fig). Thus, parameters measured in in vitro enzyme assays of Hsu1 cannot be applied here.

This model reproduced the density-dependent growth of met17Δ on sulfate: the lag times at lower densities are longer than those at higher densities. Specifically, for three cultures separated by equal (10)-fold differences in initial densities, exponential growth curves will have an equal temporal distance in a semi-log plot. Yet for met17Δ, the spacing between the lower-density curves is longer than that between the higher-density curves (Fig 5E, green double arrows; compare with Fig 2B). Interestingly in our model, low-density cultures are more sensitive to loss of sulfide (Fig 5E), potentially explaining the stochastic lag times observed in culture tubes (Figs 1D and 2B). In contrast, small variations in initial cell densities, such as those attributable to pipetting error, had a negligible effect on growth dynamics (Supplementary Text 1, section 3), presumably because the lowest cell density in our experiments was already quite large (∼105 cells/ml). Finally, the efficiency of sulfide utilization impacts density-dependent growth: lowering the Monod constant ks by 50-fold not only abrogated lag at all cell densities, but also the sensitivity to sulfide loss (Fig 5F). Thus, low efficiency of sulfide assimilation may be sufficient to explain the density-dependent growth we observe for met17Δ on sulfate.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we have investigated how budding yeast cooperatively overcome the metabolic defect caused by the deletion of MET17. The enzyme Met17 was believed to be required for yeast to generate organosulfurs from inorganic sulfate [23,40]. However, we have shown that met17Δ is not a true organosulfur auxotroph and can in fact grow using sulfate as the sole sulfur source in a density-dependent manner. This phenomenon occurs because the locus YLL058W/HSU1 can take over Met17’s function of organosulfur synthesis, albeit only at relatively high sulfide concentrations. Specifically, after reducing sulfate to sulfide, met17Δ cells fail to react sulfide with OAH to form homocysteine. The accumulating sulfide readily crosses cell membranes and partitions between the liquid and air phases. While HSU1 is expressed in met17Δ experiencing organosulfur starvation (Figs 5B and S14A), it is likely that Hsu1 is inefficient at sulfide assimilation [24,25]. Therefore, ambient sulfide levels need to be considerably high before Hsu1 can synthesize sufficient organosulfurs to fuel cell division. Cultures starting at low cell densities take longer to reach a sufficient level of sulfide, or may not reach it at all as sulfide can be lost due to gas exchange or oxidation. Thus, depending on the starting cell density and other experimental factors (e.g. the extent of aeration), met17Δ can either grow deterministically, stochastically or not grow at all on sulfate (Figs 1 and 2). The stochastic growth dynamics of low-density met17Δ culture is unlikely to be caused by a sulfide-induced cell-state switch (Fig 5A-C). Instead, low activity of Hsu1 [24,25] results in density-dependent growth (Fig 5D-F). Furthermore, at low initial cell densities, growth is particularly sensitive to variations in ambient H2S gas levels (Fig 5E), which can explain the stochasticity observed in the growth outcome of met17Δ on sulfate.

Reconciling discrepancies in experiments in yeast genetics and metabolism

In retrospect, the erratic growth behaviour of met17 mutants in the absence of organosulfurs had been noticed prior to our study. Even though MET17, MET15 and MET25 were identified as the same locus [13–15], mutants of some met25 and met17 alleles failed to grow unless supplemented with organosulfurs [14,23], whereas mutants of other met17 alleles could grow when supplied with sulfite or sulfide [23]. A careful inspection reveals that even in the study where Cost and Boeke proposed met15 as a selection marker, met15 mutants exhibited some low level of growth when patched onto sulfate-containing minimal medium which lacks organosulfurs [41]. Finally, when selecting for methyl mercury resistance, met15 (and met2) mutants grew despite the medium not having any organosulfurs [42,43]. While some of these observations could be due to reduced-function mutations associated with specific alleles, it is likely that the leaky auxotrophy of met17 mutants that we have elucidated in our study could explain some of these perplexing observations.

During the course of this study, two other studies were published reporting the anomalous growth of met17Δ and identifying the locus YLL058W/HSU1 as the cause [24,25]. However, the two studies disagreed on the observed effect of sulfide on met17Δ. Van Oss et al. claimed that sulfide accumulation was toxic to met17Δ cells, and therefore, met17Δ could grow only once HSU1 became active and neutralized some of the sulfide [24]. In stark contrast, Yu et al. claimed that sulfide accumulation facilitated HSU1-dependent growth of met17Δ [25]. Consistent with Yu et al., we found that a range of sulfide concentrations can promote the growth of both S288C met17Δ and RM11 met17Δ on sulfate (Fig 2F; S4 Fig). Consistent with Van Oss et al., we found that high sulfide concentrations can be toxic to yeast cells but we only observe such growth inhibition with addition of extraneous sulfide (Fig 2F; S4 Fig; S12 Fig). In addition, facilitating gas accumulation by sealing the tubes promoted the growth-propensity of met17Δ (Fig 2A-B), indicating that met17Δ usually experienced favorable sulfide regimes in our experiments. We can think of two possible explanations for the disparate results in Van Oss et al. First, the growth-promotion effect of the sulfide chelator Fe(III)-EDTA may not result from a reduction in sulfide levels. For instance, instead of removing sulfide, the chelator might have improved bioavailability by concentrating the sulfide, or growth might have been promoted simply by Fe(III)-supplementation. Either of these mechanisms would explain why prototrophs in their study showed an improved growth in the presence of the chelator (Fig 4B in [24]). Future studies could address this possibility by using less invasive techniques of sulfide removal such as suspending lead acetate paper in the headspace. Second, despite being closely related, the FY4 strain used in Van Oss et al. could differ from the S288C strain used in Yu et al. (and our study) in sulfide release rate or in sensitivity to sulfide.

Contrary to our findings of no detectable fitness effects of hsu1Δ compared to wildtype either during sulfur starvation or exposure to toxic Na2S concentrations (S11A Fig; S12), Yu et al. detected a small defect for hsu1Δ under sulfur limitation and a small advantage for hsu1Δ in abundant sulfur [25]. However, Yu et al. used colony counting, and we noted that colony counting produces data with high variance (S11 Fig). This variance arises from the stochasticity associated with plating small numbers of colonies, as well as errors in counting colonies (either manually or using automation). This makes it difficult to detect small fitness differences through colony counting without a high number of replicates. Our analysis, which is based on flow cytometric counting of tens of thousands of cells, has considerably higher precision.

Overall, our work has implications for yeast genetics experiments. met17Δ is a commonly used selection marker, featuring as a background deletion in the yeast deletion collection [21,44]. An understanding of the mechanism of its leaky auxotrophy will allow researchers to design protocols that circumvent the caveat. For instance, met17Δ can still be used as a selection marker if patching is done at low cell densities and growth phenotypes are assessed within short time intervals.

Considerations for quantitatively investigating volatile-mediated microbial interactions

The volatile nature of the growth substrate H2S can lend high variability to experimental observations. Our work raises awareness towards two factors in particular: First, volatile nutrients can be exchanged between seemingly unconnected microbial populations. By showing that met14Δ yeast can grow in the vicinity of sulfide-releasing met17Δ (Fig 2E), we demonstrate that assessing auxotrophy in a set-up where multiple mutants share headspace can lead to confounding conclusions. For example, H2S from neighbouring unsealed plates could explain the surprising repeated growth of wildtype FY4 in the absence of inorganic or organic sulfur observed by Van Oss et al. (Fig 2D of [24]). Second, small differences in experimental setups could give rise to considerably different experimental outcomes. A mathematical model describing the growth of met17Δ on sulfate reveals that, at lower cell densities, growth outcome is sensitive to loss of sulfide (Fig 5E). While loss of non-volatile substrates primarily occurs through chemical degradation, sulfide could also be lost due to gas escape from the culture chamber, which in turn is affected by experimental factors such as temperature [25], the thoroughness of tube sealing, and the use of agitation during growth. The problem is further exacerbated by the non-monotic effect of sulfide on met17Δ yeast populations: growth-promotion at lower doses and growth-inhibition at higher doses. Growth outcomes are thus sensitive to the exact sulfide environment that the yeast experience, which is difficult to quantitatively compare between different studies.

The liquid-gas partitioning of sulfide could pose an additional challenge for quantitatively comparing results from different setups. However, this hindrance may not be as severe as one would naively imagine. If the timescale of liquid-gas partitioning is much faster than the biological processes (e.g. consumption and birth) and gas leakage, then partitioning does not need to be modeled explicitly (Supplementary Text 1, section 4). Rather, partitioning can be accounted for by including a liquid-gas partition factor in the Monod constant (ks) and the leakage rate (δ).

Possible functions of HSU1 in sulfur metabolism and stress response

What might be the functions of HSU1? We could not detect any fitness advantage that HSU1 confers to wildtype yeast during sulfur starvation, sulfide exposure or while utilizing SMM as the sole sulfur source (Figs S11-S13). However, two lines of evidence suggest that Hsu1 plays a role in sulfur metabolism. First, HSU1 transcription is induced during sulfur limitation and starvation [37,45,46]. Hsu1 protein is also induced during sulfur starvation (Fig 4A, C) or limitation [25]. Second, in vitro biochemical assays show that, similar to Met17, Hsu1 can act as a homocysteine synthase (OAH sulfhydrylase) [24,25] as well as a cysteine synthetase (OAS sulfhydrylase) [25], although Hsu1 is much less active than Met17 [24,25].

In vitro assessment might however not suffice to reveal HSU1’s function since sulfur metabolism enzymes can show a high degree of substrate promiscuity (e.g. [47,48]). Given HSU1’s role in production of dimethyl sulfide from SMM, one can speculate that HSU1 is involved in the production of volatile sulfur compounds. Such metabolites might have non-essential roles in cellular metabolism or confer a fitness advantage only in a specific environmental context. In line with this hypothesis, the HSU1 gene shows considerable variation within the yeast strains represented in the S. cerevisiae Genome Database [49]. Of the 41 strains, HSU1 contains large deletions in 5 strains, in addition to multiple polymorphic regions (S16 Fig). In contrast, MET17 is highly conserved in all except one of these strains. This variation in HSU1 does not result purely from its proximity to the telomere since genes such as GTT2 are more proximal to the telomere but are still highly conserved. Thus, it is likely that HSU1 plays a biosynthetic role in secondary metabolism which can tolerate more variation within yeast strains.

Alternatively or in addition, HSU1 might function in stress response, which is connected to sulfur metabolism through glutathione [2]. Various findings support this speculation: The heat shock factor, which responds to diverse stresses, constitutively binds to the promoter region shared by HSU1 and GTT2 (glutathione S-transferase), and the binding is increased upon heat shock [50]. HSU1 transcription is induced after heat shock, or by exposure to hydrogen peroxide or a strong reducing agent [51]. Upon exposure to heavy metal cadmium ion, cells induce transcription of sulfur-depleted alternatives of their abundant proteins and almost all genes involved in sulfur metabolism [52,53], including HSU1 [52]. We found that in wildtype cells, Hsu1 protein level is induced upon exposure to high sulfide concentrations (Fig 4B, D) [25]. Yeast can release H2S during wine fermentation [54], either when nitrogen becomes limited in grape juice, or when elemental sulfur (from fungicides etc.) is reduced to H2S [55]. Thus, HSU1 might function to neutralize high sulfide. Note that although Hsu1 localized throughout the cytoplasm, punctate localization was occasionally observed (depending on sulfide concentration and strain background; Figs 4B and 4D). Future studies could investigate if Hsu1 puncta colocalize with stress granules or with foci formed by other sulfur metabolism enzymes (e.g. Sam1 and Sam2 [56]).

In sum, our work provides important considerations for experimental design in both yeast genetics and volatile-mediated microbial interactions, and draws attention to less understood aspects of sulfur metabolism.

METHODS

Media, chemicals and culturing conditions

Prior to an experiment, strains were revived from glycerol stocks stored at -80ºC by streaking on YPD plates (2% agar included in liquid YPD: 10 g/L yeast extract, 20 g/L peptone, 20 g/L glucose) and incubating at 30ºC for 48 hours. 2 ml of liquid YPD was then inoculated from a single colony from the plate and grown overnight at 30ºC with agitation. These saturated YPD cultures were used to inoculate SD minimal medium (6.7 g/L Difco Yeast Nitrogen Base without amino acids but with ammonium sulfate from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA and 20 g/L D-glucose) supplemented with any amino acids required by the auxotroph used in that experiment. For experiments with met17Δ, 20 mg/l of methionine was added. For WY2035, 20 mg/l of methionine and 30 mg/l lysine were added. For strains from the yeast deletion library used in Figs S5 and S8, 20 mg/l methionine, 20 mg/l uracil, 20 mg/l histidine and 60 mg/l leucine were added for exponential growth [57]. Sulfur starvation medium was prepared by replacing all sulfate salts in SD medium; a detailed list of ingredients and preparation notes are provided in S3 Table.

In certain experiments, minimal medium was supplemented with sodium sulfide, either NaHS or Na2S. For Figs 2F and S15, a 1 M NaHS stock solution was used (gifted by Prof. Mark Roth, FHCRC, Seattle, WA, USA). For all other experiments, a 1 M stock solution of Na2S (Fisher Scientific catalogue no. 10656811) was prepared in 0.001 M NaOH in an anaerobic chamber. Both the stock solutions were stored in an anoxic environment in glass tubes with self-sealing septa. Immediately prior to an experiment, approximately 50 μl of the sulfide stock was drawn out using a 27G-11/4 gauge needle. The necessary amount was pipetted into the cell culture tubes on the glass wall and mixed by vortexing only after the tubes were sealed, to minimize loss of gaseous H2S during handling.

For S13 Fig, S-methylmethionine (catalogue no. M0644, Tokyo Chemical Industry Co Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was added at a final concentration of 0.2 mM to sulfur starvation medium.

Glass tubes of either 13-mm or 18-mm diameter, with loosely fitted plastic lids, were used for culturing. Culture volume was maintained at either 2.5 ml or 3 ml in the smaller tubes or 7 ml in the larger tubes. Where sealing is mentioned, the tubes were additionally sealed with a layer of cling film and two rounds of parafilm. Tubes were placed either in a 30ºC incubator on a tilted rack with 250 rpm agitation or on a rotor wheel in a 30ºC warm room.

Yeast strains

All yeast strains used in this study are listed in S1 Table. Yeast nomenclature follows the standard convention. Primers used in the study are listed in S2 Table.

Deletion strains were constructed either via yeast crosses or by homologous recombination [58,59]. Crosses were carried out by mating parent strains, pulling diploids, sporulation, tetrad dissection, and selection on suitable plates. As an example, hsu1Δ (WY2597) was constructed by PCR-amplifying the KanMX resistance gene from a plasmid (WSB26 [60]) using the primers WSO705 and WSO706, with a 45-base pair homology to the upstream and downstream region of the HSU1 gene, respectively. A diploid heterozygous for met17Δ was then transformed with the PCR product and transformants were selected on a G418 plate. Successful deletion was confirmed via a checking PCR with a primer upstream of the HSU1 gene (WSO707) paired with an internal primer for the amplified KanMX cassette (WSO144). This diploid was then sporulated, tetrads dissected, and replica plated onto G418 and minimal medium plates for genotyping, such that both hsu1Δ and met17Δhsu1Δ strains could be generated from this protocol. Mating-type genotyping of selected clones was carried out using a PCR-based protocol with primers WSO690-692 [61]. One exception to this standard deletion process was the generation of a marker-free deletion of MET17 (WY2548) using the counter-selectable marker amdSYM [62].

For generating strains with different fluorescent labels for competition assays, an S288C MATα met17Δhsu1Δ strain (WY2602) was crossed with wildtype strains expressing either eGFP (WY1364) or mOrange (WY1376). The fluorophores tagged the constitutively expressed, cytoplasmic protein Fba1. Diploids were sporulated and tetrads dissected to obtain hsu1Δ haploids expressing either eGFP (WY2608) or mOrange (WY2612). Colonies expressing the fluorophores show a distinct colour and can therefore be distinguished by visual inspection. Since hsu1 deletion resulted in the insertion of a KanMX cassette, we removed the resistance gene in some strains to ensure that any fitness difference we observe does not result from the extra KanMX expression in hsu1Δ. To do this, we generated a plasmid carrying the dominant selection marker ClonNAT and the CRE gene (WSB194). The KanMX cassette which replaced HSU1 included LoxP flanks and could therefore be looped out by Cre activity. WY2608 was transformed with WSB194 and a selected transformant was allowed to grow to saturation in rich medium (YPD). The culture was appropriately diluted to yield approximately 300 colonies on a YPD plate. Colonies were then simultaneously patched onto YPD plates with and without G418. A colony that could grow on YPD but not on the G418 plate (i.e. had successfully looped out the KanMX cassette) was further propagated by streaking on YPD. A few colonies were selected and simultaneously patched on YPD plates with and without ClonNAT to select for loss of the Cre plasmid. A colony that grew on YPD but not ClonNAT was selected and stored to serve as an eGFP-labelled hsu1Δ strain without KanMX (WY2637).

For constructing the strain with HSU1 tagged at the C-terminus with GFP, the eGFP-KanMX cassette was amplified from WSB65 [63] using primers WSO710 and WSO706. Wildtype S288C (WY2601) and RM11 (WY1203) were transformed with the cassette and transformants were selected on a G418 plate. Transformants were confirmed using a checking PCR with primers WSO711 and WSO159 resulting in strains WY2616 (S288C) and WY2618 (RM11). These strains were mated with MATα met17Δ strains (WY577 and WY2533 for S288C and RM11, respectively), and diploids were sporulated. The dissected tetrads were screened on a minimal medium plate as well as a G418 plate to select met17Δ spores with HSU1-eGFP for each strain background (WY2620 and WY2623).

Measuring growth dynamics and growth rate

All experiments were initiated with exponentially growing cells for better reproducibility. The evening before an experiment, saturated YPD overnights were used to inoculate minimal medium supplemented with any necessary amino acids for each strain. The next day, optical density at 600 nm (OD) was tracked to check that cells were growing exponentially. Only cultures between 0.2 and 0.4 readings were used to initiate experiments.

For density-dependence assays with met17Δ cells, exponentially growing cells were washed thrice in minimal medium before resuspending and appropriately diluting in minimal media to achieve the desired cell densities. For each starting cell density, a single cell suspension was prepared, and equal volumes of this suspension was distributed into sterilized, factory-clean glass tubes.

OD measurements were carried out on a Genesys 20 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with an adjustable adapter for tubes of different diameters. Each tube was measured thrice with small rotations and the middle value was noted, to avoid the influence of scratches on the glass surface. Any values under 0.001 were below the sensitivity of the machine and were thus replaced by 0.001 for plotting. Note that on this device with tubes of 13-mm diameter, we have estimated that 1 OD corresponds to roughly 7 × 107 cells. On this device, OD no longer scales linearly with cell density beyond 0.5. The data plotted here has not been corrected for this nonlinearity.

For plate experiments, cells were cultured in a Costar 3370 96-well plate at a volume of 150 μl per well. The plates were maintained in a 30ºC incubator and OD was periodically measured with the lid on using a Biotek Synergy MX plate reader. Prior to any measurement, the cultures were agitated to suspend cells using a Teleshake magnetic shaking device (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and a custom-built “lid warmer” was used to remove condensation from the plate lid [64]. In each plate, the bottom row was filled with sterile medium for blanking. Any values under 0.001 were below the sensitivity of the machine and were thus replaced by 0.001 for plotting.

For figures S10, S12B and S13, growth rates were measured as the slope of natural log of OD measurements over time. Due to the non-linearity above 0.5 on our spectrophotometer, growth rates were only measured from OD values between 0.2 and 0.5. In S11 Fig, flow cytometry or colony counting was used to measure population densities in co-cultures. In this case the difference in growth rates of the two population was calculated as the slope of natural log of population ratios over time.

Fluorescence microscopy

The microscopy set-up comprises a Nikon Eclipse TE-2000U inverted fluorescence microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) connected to a cooled CCD camera for fluorescence and transmitted light imaging. Image acquisition is done with an in-house LabVIEW program. For imaging at different timepoints, 4 μl of the cell culture was spread under a coverslip on a slide. Images were captured using either a 100x objective (Fig 4) or a 40x objective (Fig 5B and S14A Fig). For imaging GFP, the filter cube used was Chroma 49002-ET-EGFP (exciter: 470/40x, emitter: 525/50m, Dichroic: T495LP; Chroma Technology Corp, Bellows Falls, VT, USA). Imaging conditions and exposure times were kept constant for imaging different treatments.

Flow cytometry

A detailed description has been previously published [65]. Population compositions were measured by flow cytometry using a DxP10 (Cytek, Fremont, CA, USA). To measure absolute cell densities in a sample, fluorescent beads (3-μm red fluorescent beads Cat R0300, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) of known concentration were added to each sample. The bead concentration was determined by counting on a haemocytometer. Additionally, a final 20,000-fold dilution of the “death dye” ToPro3 (Molecular Probes T-3605; Eugene, OR, USA) was added to each sample to distinguish between dead and live cells [65]. ToPro3-stained dead cells form a distinct cluster from live cells by producing a high signal on the RedFL1 channel (EX: 640nm, filter: 661/16BP). Gating and subsequent analysis were done using FlowJo™ v10.8 Software (BD Life Sciences, Ashland, OR, USA). In brief, beads were first separated from cells based on their high emission on ViolFL1 (EX: 405nm, filter: 445/50BP) and BluFL2 (EX: 488nm, filter: 585/45BP) channels. The cell cluster was further refined by their scattering profile and dead cells were excluded according to the RedFL1 signal. Within live cells, GFP-positive cluster was defined by their BluFL1 (EX: 488 nm, filter: 530/30BP) emission and mOrange-positive cluster was defined by their YelFL1 (EX: 561 nm, filter: 590/20BP) emission.

Competition

For competition assays, hsu1Δ and wildtype strains which constitutively expressed Fba1 tagged with a distinct fluorophore were generated. Each strain was grown to exponential phase in minimal medium and growth rate was tracked for 1-2 hours. The cells were then washed 3 times with sulfur starvation medium, OD values were measured, and the cells were diluted in the starvation medium to yield cultures of 0.1 OD each. 1.5 ml from each culture were combined in factory-clean 13-mm glass tubes to yield a 3ml volume with 1:1 ratio of both genotypes. Three replicate co-cultures were set up within each experiment. The co-cultures were assessed at different timepoints, usually 3-4 times on day one and once a day for subsequent days. For experiments in S11 Fig, samples were collected for both flow cytometry assessment and colony counting at each time point. Flow cytometry samples were prepared as explained in section “Flow Cytometer” and appropriately diluted to yield an event rate of under 1000/s to errors in counting. To achieve consistency in manual colony counting, samples were diluted to get roughly 300 colonies on each plate. Cell densities were however estimated by OD for plating and were therefore not very accurate. In practice, we obtained 150-200 colonies on each plate. Cells were spread on two YPD plates for each time point and allowed to grow for 2-3 days in a 30ºC incubator before counting. A Nikon AZ100 upright microscope was used to distinguish colonies expressing GFP from those expressing mOrange.

As a control, the effect of the fluorophore was tested by swapping the fluorophores on the genotypes and repeating a flow cytometry-based competition assay over the first 8 hours in sulfur starvation medium (S11B Fig). The choice of fluorophores made a measurable impact on the assay (S11C) and we therefore did not use competition assays to determine the fitness difference under high sulfide exposure. Instead, we assessed the impact of sulfide in monocultures of each genotype and assessed cell densities with flow cytometery and colony counting.

Mathematical model

The basic model and parameter values are described in the main text. The detailed development of the model is provided in Supplementary Text 1, along with the inference of some parameters (r and ks) from data-fitting. Sulfide consumption rate c was experimentally determined by measuring the increase in cell density at different sulfide concentrations (S15 Fig). Maximum growth rate gmax of met17Δ was measured from the 50-μM and 100-μM datasets in the sodium hydroxide experiment (Fig 2F), since growth was the fastest and deterministic under these sulfide treatments. Growth rate was calculated as the slope of natural log of optical density measurements over time. Carrying capacity K was also determined from the NaHS experiment by correcting stationary-phase optical density measurements for the non-linearity of our instrument at high OD values and converting the values to cell densities using the relationship 1 OD = 7 × 107 cells. Note that data used for parameter inference and measurement correspond to RM11 yeast.

Supporting information
